Add blog article “Avoid collisions assigning IP to Services” for KEP 3070 feature(s) (#32606)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2022-03-31-service-ip-dynamic-and-static-allocation.md

---
layout: blog

> title: "Avoid collisions assigning IP to Services"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Kubernetes 1.24: Avoid Collisions Assigning IP Addresses to Services"
```

> date: 2022-03-31

Reviewer: The release comms team will need to assign a date for this.

Author: where can I ping them? do they have a github alias?

Reviewer: They're [#release-comms](https://kubernetes.slack.com/messages/release-comms) on Slack (and the specific person for that is Saul - I don't know a GitHub handle)

slug: service-ip-dynamic-and-static-allocation
---

**Author:** Antonio Ojea

In Kubernetes, [Services](/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/) are an abstract way to expose
an application running on a set of Pods. Services

> can have a `ClusterIP` that is virtual and allows to load-balance traffic across the different Pods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can have a cluster-scoped virtual IP address (using a Service of `type: ClusterIP`).
Clients can connect using that virtual IP address, and Kubernetes then load-balances traffic to that
Service across the different backing Pods.
```
?

## How Service ClusterIPs are allocated?

A Service `ClusterIP` can be assigned:

_dynamically_
: the cluster's control plane automatically picks a free IP address from within the configured IP range for `type: ClusterIP` Services.

_statically_
: you specify an IP address of your choice, from within the configured IP range for Services.

Across your whole cluster, every Service `ClusterIP` must be unique.
Trying to create a Service with a `ClusterIP` that has already
been allocated will return an error.

## Why do you need to reserve Service Cluster IPs?

Because you may want to have Services running in well-known IP addresses, so other components and
users in the cluster can use them.

> The best example is the DNS Service for the cluster. Usually, people assign the 10th IP address in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The best example is the DNS Service for the cluster. Often, cluster operators assign the 10th address from
```
Do we have evidence that this practice happens more than 50% of the time?

Author: kubeadm and openshift does it, also the custom scripts to create clusters in kubernetes/kubernetes, but you are right that I should not make that assumption lightly

the Service IPv4 range to the DNS service. Assuming you configured your cluster with Service IP range
10.96.0.0/16 and you want your DNS Service IP to be 10.96.0.10, you'd have to create a Service like
this:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  labels:
    k8s-app: kube-dns
    kubernetes.io/cluster-service: "true"
    kubernetes.io/name: CoreDNS
  name: kube-dns
  namespace: kube-system
spec:
  clusterIP: 10.96.0.10
  ports:
  - name: dns
    port: 53
    protocol: UDP
    targetPort: 53
  - name: dns-tcp
    port: 53
    protocol: TCP
    targetPort: 53
  selector:
    k8s-app: kube-dns
  type: ClusterIP
```

but as I explained before, the IP address 10.96.0.10 has not been reserved; if other Services are created
before or in parallel with dynamic allocation, there is a chance they can allocate this IP, hence,
you will not be able to create the DNS Service because it will fail with a conflict error.

## How can you avoid Service ClusterIP conflicts? {#avoid-ClusterIP-conflict}

> Since Kubernetes 1.24, a new Feature Gate `ServiceIPStaticSubrange` allows to use a different IP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes 1.24, you can enable a new feature gate `ServiceIPStaticSubrange`.
Turning this on allows you to use a different IP
```

allocation strategy for Services, reducing the risk of collision.

The `ClusterIP` range will be divided, based on the formula `min(max(16, cidrSize / 16), 256)`,
described as _never less than 16 or more than 256 with a graduated step between them_.

Dynamically IP assignment will use the upper band by default, once this has been exhausted it will
use the lower range. This will allow users to use static allocations on the lower band with a low
risk of collision.

Example:

- Service IP CIDR block: 192.168.0.0/16
- Range Size: 2<sup>16</sup> - 2 = 65534
- Band Offset: `min(max(16,65536/16),256)` = `min(4096,256)` = 256
- Static band start: 192.168.0.1
- Static band ends: 192.168.1.0

> {{< figure src="static/images/blog/2022-03-31-service-ip-dynamic-and-static-allocation/serviceip-allocator.svg" alt="Kubernetes Service ClusterIP allocator" >}}

Author: not working great :/ 

https://deploy-preview-32606--kubernetes-io-main-staging.netlify.app/blog/2022/03/31/service-ip-dynamic-and-static-allocation/

Reviewer: Try this:
```suggestion
{{< figure src="/images/blog/2022-03-31-service-ip-dynamic-and-static-allocation/serviceip-allocator.svg" alt="Service ClusterIP allocator" >}}
```

---
layout: blog
title: "Avoid collisions assigning IP to Services"
date: 2022-03-31
slug: service-ip-dynamic-and-static-allocation
---

> **Author:** Antonio Ojea

Reviewer: If you want, this can be:
```suggestion
**Author:** Antonio Ojea (Red Hat)
```

> Kubernetes Services are an abstract way to expose an application running on a set of Pods. Services

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes, [Services](/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/) are an abstract way to expose
an application running on a set of Pods. Services
```

> has a `ClusterIP` that is virtual and allows to load-balance traffic across the different Pods. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can have a `ClusterIP` that is virtual and allows to load-balance traffic across the different Pods.
```

## How Service ClusterIPs are allocated?

A Service `ClusterIP` can be assigned:

> - dynamically, the cluster will automatically pick a free one within the configured Service IP
>   range.
> 
> - statically, the user will set one IP within the configured Service IP range.

Reviewer: Maybe:
```suggestion
_dynamically_
: the cluster's control plane automatically picks a free IP address from within the configured IP range for `type: ClusterIP` Services.

_statically_
: you specify an IP address of your choice, from within the configured IP range for Services.
```

> Service `ClusterIP` are unique, hence, trying to create a Service with a `ClusterIP` that has already

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Across your whole cluster, every Service `ClusterIP` must be unique.
Trying to create a Service with a `ClusterIP` that has already
```

been allocated will return an error.

> ## Why do I need to reserve Service Cluster IPs?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Why do you need to reserve Service Cluster IPs?
```

Because you may want to have Services running in well-known IP addresses, so other components and
users in the cluster can use them.

> The best example is the DNS Service for the cluster. Usually, people assign the 10th IP address in
> the Service IP range to the DNS service. Assuming our cluster has configured the Service IP range
> 10.96.0.0/16 and we want our DNS Service IP to be 10.96.0.10, we'll have to create a Service like
> this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The best example is the DNS Service for the cluster. Usually, people assign the 10th IP address in
the Service IPv4 range to the DNS service. Assuming you configured your cluster with Service IP range
10.96.0.0/16 and you want your DNS Service IP to be 10.96.0.10, you'd have to create a Service like
this:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  labels:
    k8s-app: kube-dns
    kubernetes.io/cluster-service: "true"
    kubernetes.io/name: CoreDNS
  name: kube-dns
  namespace: kube-system
spec:
  clusterIP: 10.96.0.10
  ports:
  - name: dns
    port: 53
    protocol: UDP
    targetPort: 53
  - name: dns-tcp
    port: 53
    protocol: TCP
    targetPort: 53
  selector:
    k8s-app: kube-dns
  type: ClusterIP
```

> but as we explained before, the 10.96.0.10 IP has not been reserved, if other Services are created

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but as I explained before, the IP address 10.96.0.10 has not been reserved; if other Services are created
```

before or in parallel with dynamic allocation, there is a chance they can allocate this IP, hence,

> we will not be able to create the DNS Service because it will fail with a conflict error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you will not be able to create the DNS Service because it will fail with a conflict error.
```

> ## How can I avoid Service ClusterIP conflicts?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How can you avoid Service ClusterIP conflicts? {#avoid-ClusterIP-conflict}
```

Since Kubernetes 1.24, a new Feature Gate `ServiceIPStaticSubrange` allows to use a different IP
allocation strategy for Services, reducing the risk of collision.

The `ClusterIP` range will be divided, based on the formula `min(max(16, cidrSize / 16), 256)`,
described as _never less than 16 or more than 256 with a graduated step between them_.

Dynamically IP assignment will use the upper band by default, once this has been exhausted it will
use the lower range. This will allow users to use static allocations on the lower band with a low
risk of collision.

Example:

> - Service IP CIDR: 192.168.0.0/16

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Service IP CIDR block: 192.168.0.0/16
```

> - Range Size: 2^16 - 2 = 65534

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Range Size: 2<sup>16</sup> - 2 = 65534
```
Untested, but I think that works and gets you an actual superscript.

> - Band Offset: min(max(16,65536/16),256) = min(4096,256) = 256

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Band Offset: `min(max(16,65536/16),256)` = `min(4096,256)` = 256
```

- Static band start: 192.168.0.1
- Static band ends: 192.168.1.0

     ┌─────────────┬─────────────────────────────────────────────┐
     │   static    │                    dynamic                  │
     └─────────────┴─────────────────────────────────────────────┘

>      ◄────────────► ◄────────────────────────────────────────────►

Reviewer: This should use a diagram in SVG format.

You can draw this yourself or use a tool to help. If you can, also use Kubernetes color, typefaces, etc.

See [Improve your documentation with mermaid.js diagrams](https://www.k8s.dev/blog/2021/12/01/improve-your-documentation-with-mermaid.js-diagrams/) for what I'd hope&mdash;as a co-author&mdash;is a thorough explanation of how to make that SVG starting from some Mermaid code.
